# Rationale

## Week 2: Philcamp: Digital philology, creating a digital edition

Our experience teaching in TEI and other XML workshops has shown that learning nothing more than tagging may leave scholars staring at their angle brackets and wondering what to do next. For some a framework solution like TEI Tapas or TEI Simple provides an adequate next step, but digital humanists cannot build editions that break new methodological ground solely on the basis of templateoriented solutions prepared by others, and because tools and technologies come and go, learning to translate original digital thinking about editions into original implementations of those editions (instead of just “tooling up” on today’s applications and platforms) is necessary for sustainable training and education.

Recent digital editions training programs (such as the EU DiXiT project, in which several of the instructors have taught) and publications (such as Pierazzo 2015) have hown that digital technologies enablenot only new editions, but also new types of edition, capable of answering research questions that could not have been asked previously. The goal of Week 2 is to empower the participants to create editions that are envisioned and constructed to meet project-specific research questions, and that are not constrained by predetermined models. The Institute instructors are pioneers in the development of digital editions that move from a grounding in research questions to innovative perspectives on those questions to imagining and implementing new resources to realize new types of editions. The hands-on portion of this Institute introduces tools that we have found valuable, but the goal is not as much to teach those specific tools as to help the participants learn how to move from text and research question to vision to method to implementation—whether that involves the adoption of existing toolkits or the creation of something new. We divide the second week into five major topics. On each day we will explore the reflections of one of those topics in exemplary existing projects, starting in each instance from the methodological premises (whether implicit or explicit) that underlie specific solutions. Participants will learn how to think about the five topics in the context of their own research questions, and they will gain experience in applying the daily themes to their own materials. By the end of the week the participants will have acquired significant hands-on experience with the tools we use for illustration, but what is more important is that they will have gained experience in conceptualizing, planning, and implementing the transition from tagged text to digital edition within the context of their own project-specific research questions.